--- PAGE 1 ---
Instructions for Using the Microsoft Word 2010–2016 
Proceedings Paper Template 
1 Working with the Document Template 
1.1 General Information 
The template, splnproc1702.docm, has been designed for authors preparing a paper to 
be published in one of Springer’s proceedings series. The templ ate supports Word 
2010 and newer. As Word for Mac 2016 does not yet support all f eatures provided in 
Word 2010-2016 for Windows, a special template version splnproc1702_mac.docm is 
provided for Mac users. 
Predefined style formats are available for all the necessary structures to be included 
in the manuscript, and these fo rmats can be quickly accessed us ing a custom ribbon 
tab provided with the template. 
For a detailed description of how to prepare your text, illustr ations, and references, 
see the Springer Guidelines for Authors of Proceedings. 
Please note that the template is provided as a sample document (.docm),  
while earlier versions came in the Microsoft Word template format (.dotm). 
Authors who prefer to work with t emplates in the .dotm format c an request this for-
mat from our editorial as well. 
1.2 How to Style Your Paper 
If you have not yet started to write your paper, simply open th e document 
splnproc1702.docm and overwrite its sample contents with your data. Use the buttons 
of the template’s custom ribbon to format additional elements.  
If you use copy & paste to transfer content from another docume nt to the template, 
please note that the original formatting of the pasted text wil l usually be retained. It 
will not be automatically adjuste d to the template’s predefined  styles. In this case 
you should select the pasted paragraphs and use the built-in ma cros to format them 
according to the Springer standard. 
Finally name the document with your name and a short form of th e title (e.g., 
Smith_TitleOfMyPaper.doc).  
1.3 Activate the Macros 
The activation of the template’s custom ribbon and macros depen ds on the security 
settings on your individual system. If you encounter problems i n activating the mac-
ros, please check https://support.office.com/en-us/article/Enable-or-disable-macros-in-
Office-files-12b036f-d140-4e74-b45e-16fed1a7e5c6 or the documen tation of the 
Microsoft Word version you are using. 

--- PAGE 2 ---
2 Using the Microsoft Word 2010–2016 Proceedings Paper Template  
2 What the Ribbon’s Commands Do 
The ‘Springer Proceedings Macros’ ribbon mainly consists of buttons for the available 
style elements in the template. All commands are applied to the highlighted text. If no 
text is highlighted, the selected style will be assigned to the  paragraph that currently 
has the cursor in it.  
We recommend that you first enter your text and then click the required button. For 
example, if you have just typed your affiliation and you are go ing to continue with 
writing your abstract, do not clic k ‘Abstract’ before having st arted a new paragraph. 
Otherwise the abstract format will be applied to the address in formation, where the 
cursor is still positioned. 
The descriptions below show you how the ribbon buttons work in detail. 
 
Fig. 1. Custom ribbon ‘Springer Proceedings Macros’  
2.1 How to Format the Header of Your Paper 
Button Effect Description 
 
Formats the 
contribution title 
 This button does not work if more than one 
paragraph is selected.  
 If a subtitle follows the title, the space after 
the paragraph is adjusted automatically. 
 
Formats a 
contribution subtitle 
 This button does not work if more than one 
paragraph is selected.  
 The spacing between the title and the subtitle 
is adjusted automatically. 
 
Formats the 
authors’ names 
 This button does not work if more than one 
paragraph is selected.  
 
Formats ORCID ids  The current text selection is formatted as 
superscript.  
 This button also checks for the correct syntax 
of the ORCID id ‘[0000-1111-2222-3333]’. 
 Please note that ORCID ids will not be  
printed. In the eBook version, they will be 
replaced by a symbol that is hyperlinked to 
the related ORCID profile.  
 

--- PAGE 3 ---
Using the Microsoft Word 2010–2016 Proceedings Paper Template 3  
 
Formats affiliation and 
address information  
 This button sets the paragraph format for any 
affiliation information including e-mail ad-
dresses and URLs.  
 The font of e-mail addresses and URLs can 
be adjusted by using the ‘Email/URL’ button. 
 Formats e-mail addresses 
and URLs 
 This button changes the font of the current 
text selection to a typewriter font.  
 If no text is selected, the word next to the 
current cursor position is formatted with the 
typewriter font.  
 
Formats the abstract  In addition to applying the appropriate para-
graph format, the word ‘Abstract’ is added at 
the beginning of the first paragraph. 
 
Formats the keywords  This button does not work if more than one 
paragraph is selected.  
 The word ‘Keywords’ is added at the begin-
ning of the paragraph if not yet present. 
2.2 How to Format Headings 
Button Effect Description 
 
Formats a level 1 heading
(numbered section 
heading) 
 If you want to create a heading without a 
number, e.g., ‘References’, simply place the 
cursor at the beginning of the text and press 
the backspace key [←]. 
 
Formats a level 2 heading
(numbered subsection 
heading) 
 If you want to create a heading without a 
number, simply place the cursor at the be-
ginning of the text and press the backspace 
key [←]. 
 
Formats a level 3 heading 
(bold run-in heading) 
 If applied to selected text:  
The selection is formatted as bold run-in 
heading. 
 If applied to a paragraph:  
The first sentence, i.e., up to the first period, is 
formatted in bold font style as run-in heading. 
 If applied to an empty paragraph:  
Bold font style is applied to any text then 
typed in. Once you have finished the heading, 
you should press the ‘Normal Text’ button to 
reset the character style to normal text again.  

--- PAGE 4 ---
4 Using the Microsoft Word 2010–2016 Proceedings Paper Template  
Button Effect Description 
 
Formats a level 4 heading 
(italic run-in heading) 
 If applied to selected text:  
The selection is formatted as italic run-in 
heading. 
 If applied to a paragraph:  
The first sentence, i.e., up to the first period, is 
formatted in italic font style as run-in heading. 
 If applied to an empty paragraph:  
Italic font style is applied to any text then 
typed in. Once you have finished the heading, 
you should press the ‘Normal Text’ button to 
reset the character style to normal text again. 
2.3 How to Create Lists 
Button Effect Description 
 
 
Creates an unnumbered 
list with bullet items/dash 
items on the 1st level 
 This button applies a complete itemization 
scheme with multiple levels. 
 The only difference between the two buttons 
is that one starts with bullets and continues 
with dashes on the 2nd level, while the other 
starts with dashes and continues with bullets 
on the 2
nd level.  
 Use the ‘list level’ buttons to set the levels 
and indents for nested lists. 
 Vertical space will only be added before and 
after a list. The spacing is adjusted automati-
cally if you select a complete block of elements 
before clicking on one of the list buttons. 
 
Creates a numbered list 
with Arabic numerals on 
its 1st level 
 Contains a numbering scheme with multiple 
levels. The 2 nd level uses alphabetic charac-
ters, the 3rd level uses lower case Roman 
numerals, and so on.  
 Use the ‘list level’ buttons to set the levels 
and indents of nested lists. 
 Vertical space will only be added before and 
after a list. The spacing is adjusted automati-
cally if you select a complete block of elements 
before clicking on one of the list buttons. 
 
Restarts or continues a 
numbered list 
 Only works for numbered lists. 
 If more than one paragraph is selected, the 
button only applies to the first paragraph. 
 

--- PAGE 5 ---
Using the Microsoft Word 2010–2016 Proceedings Paper Template 5  
 
Increases the level of an 
existing numbered or 
unnumbered list 
(increases the  
indentation) 
 Only works for text that has already been 
formatted with one of the ‘Bullet item,’ ‘Dash 
item,’ or ‘Num item’ buttons before. 
 Please only use this button with nested lists. 
 If you want to create, e.g., a numbered list 
with bulleted subitems, you should first select 
all items and click on the ‘Num item’ button. 
Then select the subitems and hit the ‘Dash 
item’ button. Finally, apply ‘List level up’ to 
the subitems. The indentation will be shifted 
to the next level and the dashes will be con-
verted to bullets since bullets represent the 
second level of the ‘Dash item’ list template. 
 
Decreases the level of an 
existing numbered or 
unnumbered list 
(decreases the  
indentation) 
 Only works for text that has already been 
formatted with one of the ‘Bullet item,’ ‘Dash 
item,’ or ‘Num item’ buttons and has been 
shifted to a higher level. 
 Please only use this button with nested lists. 
2.4 How to Format Text and Paragraphs 
Button Effect Description 
 
Formats normal text  Depending on the current selection, this but-
ton either applies the default font or it applies 
the default paragraph format:  
 If an entire paragraph (or nothing) is selected, 
and the underlying format is different from the 
standard paragraph format: The standard 
paragraph format is applied to the selection.  
 If an entire paragraph (or nothing) is selected, 
and the underlying format is already the 
standard paragraph format: The standard 
character style is applied to the selection. 
 If text is selected that does not follow the 
default character style: The standard charac-
ter style is applied to the selection. 
 If text is selected that already follows the 
default character style: The standard para-
graph format is applied to the selection. 
 If you want to apply the standard paragraph 
format and remove a nonstandard character 
style, simply click on the button twice. 
 Please note that standard paragraphs are not 
indented after headings, captions, lists, etc., but 
they have a first-line indent in all other cases.  

--- PAGE 6 ---
6 Using the Microsoft Word 2010–2016 Proceedings Paper Template  
Button Effect Description 
 
Inserts vertical space   This button adds 6 pt (2.1 mm) of vertical 
space before the selected paragraph.  
 
Removes space before 
and after the current 
selection 
 This button clears any vertical space before 
and after the selected text. 
 If space remains after the button has been 
clicked, please check the preceding and/or the 
following paragraphs for their settings. 
 
Inserts a footnote  This button inserts a footnote at the current 
cursor position.  
 For remarks to the contribution title, the 
footnote character is automatically changed 
to a symbol (instead of a number). 
 
Formats a reference entry  This command helps you format numbered 
reference lists.  
 The hanging indent of the reference items is 
automatically adjusted based on the total 
number of references.  
 If you prefer unnumbered references, simply 
place the cursor at the beginning of each ref-
erence item and press the backspace key [←] 
to remove the number. 
2.5 How to Format Special Elements of Your Paper 
Button Effect Description 
 
Inserts an image from 
an external file 
 The image is always placed in an empty 
paragraph. 
 If the cursor is not in an empty paragraph 
when clicking on this button, a new para-
graph is added after the current one, and 
the image is inserted there. 
 
Formats a figure caption  In addition to applying the appropriate 
paragraph format, ‘Fig. [X]’ is added at 
the beginning of the paragraph ([X] is an 
automatic counter that is updated whenev-
er the document is opened). 
 This macro does not work if more than 
one paragraph is selected. 
 If the caption runs over multiple lines the 
paragraph alignment is automatically 
switched to justified. 

--- PAGE 7 ---
Using the Microsoft Word 2010–2016 Proceedings Paper Template 7  
Button Effect Description 
 
Formats a table caption  In addition to applying the appropriate 
paragraph format, ‘Table [X]’ is added at 
the beginning of the paragraph ([X] is an 
automatic counter that is updated whenev-
er the document is opened). 
 This macro does not work if more than 
one paragraph is selected. 
 If the caption runs over multiple lines, the 
paragraph alignment is automatically 
switched to justified. 
 
Inserts a table   This dropdown button provides the same 
functionality as Microsoft Word’s genuine 
table button that can be found on the  
‘Insert’ ribbon.  
 
Formats a displayed 
equation 
 Displayed equations are always centered 
between the text margins. 
 If you want to align the equal sign in 
multiline displays, please use the align-
ment feature of the equation editor. 
 
Adds an equation num-
ber to a displayed equa-
tion 
 This button only works if the selected 
paragraph has already been formatted 
with the ‘Equation’ button.  
 The automatic counter that is inserted in 
the right margin is updated whenever the 
document is opened. 
 
Formats program list-
ings and command 
sequences 
 Please note that the paragraph format 
includes tabulators every 4 mm that can 
help you adjust the indentation of code 
blocks. 
2.6 How to Restore the Template Styles 
Button Effect Description 
 
Checks the template and 
restores all predefined 
styles  
 If the original template styles were altered or 
are not available anymore, you can restore 
them by clicking this button. Individual for-
matting will be retained. 
 Please note that some special spacing, i.e. 
between level 1 and level 2 headings or be-
tween unnumbered or numbered items, 
might be lost. It can be restored by clicking 
the related formatting button(s) again.  

--- PAGE 8 ---
8 Using the Microsoft Word 2010–2016 Proceedings Paper Template  
3 Frequently Asked Questions 
I do not see the ‘Springer Proceedings Macros’ ribbon – what’s the problem? 
If you do not see the ‘Springer Proceedings Macros’ ribbon described in this document, 
it has probably been deactivated by your current macro security settings.  
To read more about the macro secu rity in Microsoft Office and h ow they are con-
figured, please check the information available at https://support.office.com/en-us/artic-
le/Enable-or-disable-macros-in-Office-files-12b036fd-d140-4e74-b45e-16fed1a7e5c6. 
Clicking a formatting button on the ‘Springer Proceedings Macros’ ribbon throws 
the error ‘The predefined paragraph/character style … could not be found in the 
template’. 
The typical reason for this issue  is that styles associated wit h the formatting buttons 
were deleted or renamed. You can automatically restore them by clicking the “restore 
styles” button (see 2.6). 
I have copied text from another document into the template, but  it is not or not 
fully adjusted to the Springer standard. 
There are three possible reasons : First, only formatting styles  that already existed in 
your original document can be updated by the template. Second, only if those styles 
were used in your original docum ent, can adjusting them have a visible effect. Third, 
please consider that individual modifications of certain styles  a r e  u s u a l l y  r e t a i n e d ,  
even if the original styles are overwritten by the settings in the template. In all three 
cases, you should simply re-apply the appropriate styles using the formatting button 
of the ‘Springer Proceedings Macros’ ribbon. 
I have formatted a text element by clicking the respective butt on, but some of 
the selected style’s properties were obviously not applied. 
There might be a conflict between the underlying paragraph style and some individual 
character and paragraph formatting. Most buttons in the ribbon change the underlying 
style only and do not generally adjust individual formatting th at might be present in 
the selected text. Solution: First reset the text formatting by  clicking the ‘Normal 
Text’ button twice, then apply the desired style. 
The automatic numbering of sections and subsections seems to be corrupted. 
Please simply apply the H1 and H 2 formats to the affected secti on headings or sub-
section headings once again to correct the numbering. 

--- PAGE 9 ---
Using the Microsoft Word 2010–2016 Proceedings Paper Template 9  
I would like to use special characters in my text – how should I insert them? 
Reformatting running text, in which special characters such as Greek letters have been 
entered via the keyboard, can cau se these characters to disappe ar. In order to avoid 
this problem, always insert speci al characters into your docume nt from the menu 
point Insert→Symbol. In the Symbol dialog box, select the required character. 
March 1, 2017 

